---
title: HTTP - The backbone of Internet
date: 2021-01-03
draft: false
categories:
  - http
  - beginner
---

> Layman explanation of HTTP

<!-- more -->

The internet(or World Wide Web) is now an inseparable part of our lives. We
can't imagine our lives without the ease and information the internet provides
us. Services like Google Search, WhatsApp, Facebook, Internet Banking, Online
Reservations etc have transformed our lives. It goes without saying that there
is great business opportunity for companies and people making online
applications. 

Those who are in the business of building online applications/services, or
intend to join such as business should have an understanding of the units that
forms the internet as we know it today. Hence, I present you this article that
talks about a technology called HTTP that is one of the building blocks of
internet.

## What the hell is HTTP?

If you are viewing photos on Instagram, or watching videos on Youtube or
reading this article Quepinch, the content in all these cases is stored in a
computer (that is far away, may be in another country). That content has to be
transferred from the remote computers to your mobile or laptop. There are
millions and billions of users consuming information on their computers. To
reliably serve so many consumers there is need of certain rules(also called
'protocols') to transfer the data from the storage computers to the consumers.
_HTTP_ is one of those rules. And it is a very important rule. Almost everything
[that](that) you see in our web browser or mobile uses HTTP!

HTTP is an acronym that stands for _*H*yper*T*ext *T*ransfer *P*rotocol_.

_HTTP is a set of rules that specifies how two computers can talk to each other
over the internet._

## Who made HTTP and where is it written ?

The first version of HTTP is called _HTTP 0.9_ and was developed by [Tim
Berners-Lee](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tim_Berners-Lee) in 1989. 

<img width=200
src="https://s3.ap-south-1.amazonaws.com/prd-hc-oj-public-1/public/users/73794b05-fe63-4188-81cd-b6fd35c7aa4e/images/XAdOpEwgnPiHryCJ1hcUBYjTCfXcebP6"
style="display: block; margin-left:auto; margin-right:auto" >

(Image Source: [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tim_Berners-Lee))

Tim is an engineer and computer scientist. He is best known as the inventor of
World Wide Web.

The HTTP protocol documentation is maintained by [IETF(Internet Engineering
Task Force)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_Engineering_Task_Force)
which is an organisation that helps develop and promote internet standards such
as the HTTP protocol.

The exact definition of the protocol is written in a text document known as
[Request for
Comments(RFC)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Request_for_Comments), which is a
common way specifying specifications in the technical community. 

Any protocol, in fact anything, can't be developed without imperfections in the
first shot. Hence, multiple versions needs to be developed, where each version
is better than the previous one. HTTP also has multiple versions. _The most
commonly used version is HTTP 1.1._

The latest version for HTTP 1.1 is mention in [RFC 7230](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7230).

## If I want to learn developing online apps, do I need to know everything HTTP documentation says?

Fortunately no. 

The exact rules are implemented by the browser. Each browser is developed and
enhanced by their respective team of developers. The team should ensure that
their browser software is up to date with the HTTP protocols and the continuous
enhancements being made in it.

As a software developer, one must know the basics of HTTP i.e. the principles
on which it is designed. This helps to understand how the browser will behave
in different situations. What different cases you can encounter while writing
your web application.

Another post HTTP basics coming soon!

## But, I have also heard about HTTPS. Is it the plural of HTTP?

_HTTPS_ is another protocol. _HTTPS_ stands for _HTTP Secure_ which, as the name
suggests, is HTTP with enhanced security. HTTPS ensures that the data that is
being transferred from one computer to another is *encrypted so that bad guys
can't read your data.

*__Encryption__ is the process of transforming data into some garbage values so
that people can't make sense from it. The sender computer encrypts and sends
the data to the receiver, and only the receiver has the knowledge to transform
the data into its original form. Hence, even if a third person possesses the
encrypted data, he/she can't understand it.

Without HTTPS services like internet banking, chatting applications(like
WhatsApp), Instagram etc. can't function!

HTTPS is mandatory for online security. You must not trust websites that do not
operate on HTTPS. Anyone can read your data in non HTTPS websites.

Browser can show visual signs about a _secured site_ running on HTTPS vs an
unsecured site running on plain HTTP. The following images are from Chrome
browser.

<img width=50%
src="https://s3.ap-south-1.amazonaws.com/prd-hc-oj-public-1/public/users/73794b05-fe63-4188-81cd-b6fd35c7aa4e/images/fJIjCHnT1gqFZzmFakAL8vVe6T7aLmzR"
style="display: block; margin-left:auto; margin-right:auto" >
>

<img width=50%
src="https://s3.ap-south-1.amazonaws.com/prd-hc-oj-public-1/public/users/73794b05-fe63-4188-81cd-b6fd35c7aa4e/images/tyVY1iSmOUxGSAIuk6VECLtdZV7y3ceR"
style="display: block; margin-left:auto; margin-right:auto" >
>
[Image]()
